README.md, before:

# 🧬🔠 `scoring-matrices` [![Stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/althonos/scoring-matrices.svg?style=social&maxAge=3600&label=Star)](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/stargazers)

*Dependency free, [Cython](https://cython.org/)-compatible scoring matrices to use with biological sequences.*

<!-- [![Actions](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/althonos/scoring-matrices/test.yml?branch=main&logo=github&style=flat-square&maxAge=300)](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/actions) -->
<!-- [![Coverage](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/gh/althonos/scoring-matrices?style=flat-square&maxAge=3600&logo=codecov)](https://codecov.io/gh/althonos/scoring-matrices/) -->
<!-- [![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPLv3+-blue.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=2678400)](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/gpl-3.0/) -->
<!-- [![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/scoring-matrices.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=3600&logo=PyPI)](https://pypi.org/project/scoring-matrices) -->
<!-- [![Bioconda](https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/bioconda/scoring-matrices?style=flat-square&maxAge=3600&logo=anaconda)](https://anaconda.org/bioconda/scoring-matrices) -->
<!-- [![AUR](https://img.shields.io/aur/version/python-scoring-matrices?logo=archlinux&style=flat-square&maxAge=3600)](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/python-scoring-matrices) -->
<!-- [![Wheel](https://img.shields.io/pypi/wheel/scoring-matrices.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=3600)](https://pypi.org/project/scoring-matrices/#files) -->
<!-- [![Python Versions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/scoring-matrices.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=600&logo=python)](https://pypi.org/project/scoring-matrices/#files) -->
<!-- [![Python Implementations](https://img.shields.io/pypi/implementation/scoring-matrices.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=600&label=impl)](https://pypi.org/project/scoring-matrices/#files) -->
<!-- [![Source](https://img.shields.io/badge/source-GitHub-303030.svg?maxAge=2678400&style=flat-square)](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/) -->
<!-- [![Mirror](https://img.shields.io/badge/mirror-EMBL-009f4d?style=flat-square&maxAge=2678400)](https://git.embl.de/larralde/scoring-matrices/) -->
<!-- [![Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/althonos/scoring-matrices.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=600)](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/issues) -->
<!-- [![Docs](https://img.shields.io/readthedocs/scoring-matrices/latest?style=flat-square&maxAge=600)](https://scoring-matrices.readthedocs.io) -->
<!-- [![Changelog](https://img.shields.io/badge/keep%20a-changelog-8A0707.svg?maxAge=2678400&style=flat-square)](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md) -->
<!-- [![Downloads](https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/scoring-matrices?style=flat-square&color=303f9f&maxAge=86400&label=downloads)](https://pepy.tech/project/scoring-matrices) -->

## 🗺️ Overview

*Scoring Matrices* are matrices used to score the matches and mismatches between
two characters are the same position in a sequence alignment. Some of these
matrices are derived from *substitution matrices*, which uses evolutionary 
modeling.

The `scoring-matrices` packages is a dependency-free, batteries included library
to handle and distribute common substitution matrices:

- **no external dependencies**: You don't need the whole Biopython ecosystem
  just to access to the matrix weights.
- **common matrices**: Most common matrices, such as those used by the NCBI 
  BLAST+ suite, including **PAM**, **BLOSUM**, **VTML**
- **Cython compatibility**: The `ScoringMatrix` is a Cython class that can be
  inherited, and the matrix data can be accessed as either a raw pointer, or
  a [typed memoryview](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/userguide/memoryviews.html).


## 🔧 Installing

`scoring-matrices` is available for all modern Python versions (3.6+).

## 💡 Usage

Import the `ScoringMatrix` class from the installed module:
```python
from scoring_matrices import ScoringMatrix
```

Load one of the built-in matrices:
```python
blosum62 = ScoringMatrix.builtin("BLOSUM62")
```

Get individual matrix weights either by index or by alphabet letter:
```python
x = blosum62[0, 0]
y = blosum62['A', 'A']
```

Get a row of the matrix either by index or by alphabet letter:
```python
row_x = blosum62[0]
row_y = blosum62['A']
```

### Cython

The matrix data can be accessed as a raw `float` pointer or a [typed memoryview](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/userguide/memoryviews.html):
```cython
cdef ScoringMatrix matrix = ScoringMatrix.builtin("VTML80")
cdef float** data_ptr = matrix.data
cdef float[:, :] data_mem = matrix
```

## 💭 Feedback

### ⚠️ Issue Tracker

Found a bug ? Have an enhancement request ? Head over to the [GitHub issue tracker](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/issues)
if you need to report or ask something. If you are filing in on a bug,
please include as much information as you can about the issue, and try to
recreate the same bug in a simple, easily reproducible situation.

### 🏗️ Contributing

Contributions are more than welcome! See
[`CONTRIBUTING.md`](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
for more details.


## 📋 Changelog

This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html)
and provides a [changelog](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md)
in the [Keep a Changelog](http://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/) format.


## ⚖️ License

This library is provided under the [MIT License](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/).

*This project was developed by [Martin Larralde](https://github.com/althonos/) 
during his PhD project at the [Leiden University Medical Center](https://www.lumc.nl/en/) in the [Zeller team](https://github.com/zellerlab).*

Commit message:

Add matrices from Benner et al. (1994)

README.md, after:

# 🧬🔠 `scoring-matrices` [![Stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/althonos/scoring-matrices.svg?style=social&maxAge=3600&label=Star)](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/stargazers)

*Dependency free, [Cython](https://cython.org/)-compatible scoring matrices to use with biological sequences.*

<!-- [![Actions](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/althonos/scoring-matrices/test.yml?branch=main&logo=github&style=flat-square&maxAge=300)](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/actions) -->
<!-- [![Coverage](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/gh/althonos/scoring-matrices?style=flat-square&maxAge=3600&logo=codecov)](https://codecov.io/gh/althonos/scoring-matrices/) -->
<!-- [![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPLv3+-blue.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=2678400)](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/gpl-3.0/) -->
<!-- [![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/scoring-matrices.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=3600&logo=PyPI)](https://pypi.org/project/scoring-matrices) -->
<!-- [![Bioconda](https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/bioconda/scoring-matrices?style=flat-square&maxAge=3600&logo=anaconda)](https://anaconda.org/bioconda/scoring-matrices) -->
<!-- [![AUR](https://img.shields.io/aur/version/python-scoring-matrices?logo=archlinux&style=flat-square&maxAge=3600)](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/python-scoring-matrices) -->
<!-- [![Wheel](https://img.shields.io/pypi/wheel/scoring-matrices.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=3600)](https://pypi.org/project/scoring-matrices/#files) -->
<!-- [![Python Versions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/scoring-matrices.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=600&logo=python)](https://pypi.org/project/scoring-matrices/#files) -->
<!-- [![Python Implementations](https://img.shields.io/pypi/implementation/scoring-matrices.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=600&label=impl)](https://pypi.org/project/scoring-matrices/#files) -->
<!-- [![Source](https://img.shields.io/badge/source-GitHub-303030.svg?maxAge=2678400&style=flat-square)](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/) -->
<!-- [![Mirror](https://img.shields.io/badge/mirror-EMBL-009f4d?style=flat-square&maxAge=2678400)](https://git.embl.de/larralde/scoring-matrices/) -->
<!-- [![Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/althonos/scoring-matrices.svg?style=flat-square&maxAge=600)](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/issues) -->
<!-- [![Docs](https://img.shields.io/readthedocs/scoring-matrices/latest?style=flat-square&maxAge=600)](https://scoring-matrices.readthedocs.io) -->
<!-- [![Changelog](https://img.shields.io/badge/keep%20a-changelog-8A0707.svg?maxAge=2678400&style=flat-square)](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md) -->
<!-- [![Downloads](https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/scoring-matrices?style=flat-square&color=303f9f&maxAge=86400&label=downloads)](https://pepy.tech/project/scoring-matrices) -->

## 🗺️ Overview

*Scoring Matrices* are matrices used to score the matches and mismatches between
two characters are the same position in a sequence alignment. Some of these
matrices are derived from *substitution matrices*, which uses evolutionary 
modeling.

The `scoring-matrices` packages is a dependency-free, batteries included library
to handle and distribute common substitution matrices:

- **no external dependencies**: The matrices are distributed as-is: you don't 
  need the whole [Biopython](https://biopython.org) ecosystem, or even 
  [NumPy](https://numpy.org/).
- **common matrices**: The package distributes most common matrices, such as 
  those used by the NCBI BLAST+ suite, including:
  - [*PAM*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Point_accepted_mutation#) matrices by Dayhoff *et al.* (1978).
  - [*BLOSUM*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BLOSUM) matrices by Henikoff & Henikoff (1992).
  - *VTML* matrices by Muller *et al.* (2002).
  - *BENNER* matrices by Benner *et al.* (1994).
- **Cython compatibility**: The `ScoringMatrix` is a Cython class that can be
  inherited, and the matrix data can be accessed as either a raw pointer, or
  a [typed memoryview](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/userguide/memoryviews.html).


## 🔧 Installing

`scoring-matrices` is available for all modern Python versions (3.6+).

## 💡 Usage

Import the `ScoringMatrix` class from the installed module:
```python
from scoring_matrices import ScoringMatrix
```

Load one of the built-in matrices:
```python
blosum62 = ScoringMatrix.builtin("BLOSUM62")
```

Get individual matrix weights either by index or by alphabet letter:
```python
x = blosum62[0, 0]
y = blosum62['A', 'A']
```

Get a row of the matrix either by index or by alphabet letter:
```python
row_x = blosum62[0]
row_y = blosum62['A']
```

### Cython

The matrix data can be accessed as a raw `float` pointer or a [typed memoryview](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/userguide/memoryviews.html):
```cython
cdef ScoringMatrix matrix = ScoringMatrix.builtin("VTML80")
cdef float** data_ptr = matrix.data
cdef float[:, :] data_mem = matrix
```

## 💭 Feedback

### ⚠️ Issue Tracker

Found a bug ? Have an enhancement request ? Head over to the [GitHub issue tracker](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/issues)
if you need to report or ask something. If you are filing in on a bug,
please include as much information as you can about the issue, and try to
recreate the same bug in a simple, easily reproducible situation.

### 🏗️ Contributing

Contributions are more than welcome! See
[`CONTRIBUTING.md`](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
for more details.


## 📋 Changelog

This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html)
and provides a [changelog](https://github.com/althonos/scoring-matrices/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md)
in the [Keep a Changelog](http://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/) format.


## ⚖️ License

This library is provided under the [MIT License](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/).

*This project was developed by [Martin Larralde](https://github.com/althonos/) 
during his PhD project at the [Leiden University Medical Center](https://www.lumc.nl/en/) in the [Zeller team](https://github.com/zellerlab).*
